# testdump

> Snapshot testing for Go
 
`testdump` is a simple Go package for snapshot testing. It helps you ensure that your code produces the same output over time.

Dumps for different format (`json`, `yaml`, `pg`, `mysql`, `sql`, `grpc`, `http`, `text`) is available in the respective directory.

See the tests for more example.

## Basic usage

```go
package main

import (
	"testing"
	"time"

	"github.com/alextanhongpin/testdump/jsondump"
)

type User struct {
	Age       int
	Name      string
	CreatedAt time.Time
}

func TestJSONDump(t *testing.T) {
	jsondump.Dump(t, &User{
		Age:       13,
		Name:      "John Appleseed",
		CreatedAt: time.Now(),
	})
}
```

Run this locally `go test -v`.

It will produce a dump in `testdata/TestJSONDump/main.User.json`:

```json
{
 "Age": 13,
 "Name": "John Appleseed",
 "CreatedAt": "2024-06-19T02:08:54.802509+08:00"
}
```

Make any changes to the values, or just re-run it again to see this error:

```bash
➜  go-test-jsondump go test -v
=== RUN   TestJSONDump
    json.go:28:

          Snapshot(-)
          Received(+)


          map[string]any{
                "Age": float64(13),
                "CreatedAt": strings.Join({
                        "2024-06-19T02:",
        -               "08:54.802509",
        +               "10:05.119235",
                        "+08:00",
                }, ""),
                "Name": string("John Appleseed"),
          }

--- FAIL: TestJSONDump (0.00s)
FAIL
exit status 1
FAIL    github.com/alextanhongpin/go-test-jsondump      0.243s
```

Whenever there are difference in the generated snapshot, testdump will show the diffs. In this scenario, the `CreatedAt` value changes every time the test is run.

For such cases, we can choose to ignore the fields from comparison. Update the test to ignore the field `CreatedAt`:

```diff
func TestJSONDump(t *testing.T) {
	jsondump.Dump(t, &User{
		Age:       13,
		Name:      "John Appleseed",
		CreatedAt: time.Now(),
+	}, jsondump.IgnoreFields("CreatedAt"))
}
```

Re-running this will now result in a successful test:

```bash
➜  go-test-jsondump go test -v
=== RUN   TestJSONDump
--- PASS: TestJSONDump (0.00s)
PASS
ok      github.com/alextanhongpin/go-test-jsondump      0.551s
```

## Clean testing

The idea behind this library is to have clean tests. By clean testing, we mean assertion free tests. 

Instead of asserting all fields of a struct one by one, we generate the expected snapshot, and just commit the snapshot. Any changes to the snapshot will be shown when re-running the tests, and the changes can also be captured through code review. 

This saves a lot of time, since adding/removing fields should not require touching the code, but just re-running the tests and committing the updated snapshot.

The generated snapshots (aka artifacts) can also be used by LLM etc for more complex validation.

Aside from this, it provides huge observability. Instead of printing/logging the output, the generated snapshot provides all the necessary details which might not be captured normally (e.g. `httpdump` also dumps all the request/response headers, http methods, query string, status code etc, when normally people tests only the status code and expected body). An additional option is also provided to write the existing output aside from the frozen snapshot so you can see the actual values generated by your system.
